GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Oh, I think he represents a
great threat to
our society and our economy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I sit down with
the new presumptive
nominee, Hillary Clinton, to
talk about facing
Donald Trump head on and what
lies ahead.
GWEN IFILL: Plus, we examine
Hillary Clinton's
achievement and the possibility
of a woman
president, as Republicans
express continued
concern about Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday:
inside Nepal's kilns. Children
workers are
making bricks to rebuild the
country's earthquake-stricken
towns.
GWEN IFILL: And preventing fires
in space,
a look at how scientists are
keeping spacecrafts
safe from micro-gravity fires.
JERRY LINENGER, NASA: Fourteen
minutes is
a long time with a roaring fire
and a blackout
from the smoke, and no place to
go. And if
it were any bigger, I'm pretty
darn sure we
would have lost that spacecraft.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton
celebrated
today after clinching the
Democratic presidential
nomination and winning four of
six primaries
on Tuesday. Bernie Sanders
insisted he's not
dropping out, even as he plans
to meet tomorrow
with President Obama.
And Republican Donald Trump
appealed to Democrats,
even as he feuded with GOP
leaders.
All three spoke to their
supporters last night.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Now, I know it never feels good
to put your
heart into a cause or a
candidate you believe
in, and to come up short. I know
that feeling
well.
(LAUGHTER)
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: But, as
we look ahead
-- as we look ahead to the
battle that awaits,
let's remember all that unites
us.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
I know that the fight in front
of us is a
very, very steep fight. But we
will continue
to fight for every vote and
every delegate
we can get.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
To all of those Bernie Sanders
voters who
have been left out in the cold
by a rigged
system of superdelegates, we
welcome you with
open arms.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will have
our interview
with Hillary Clinton right after
the news
summary.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: For the
first time, there won't be a
Republican in
California's U.S. Senate race.
The top two
vote-getters advanced Tuesday,
and both were
Democrats, state Attorney
General Kamala Harris,
by a wide margin, and
Congresswoman Loretta
Sanchez, a 10-term veteran.
Meanwhile, Representative Renee
Ellmers of
North Carolina was ousted by
another Republican
in a redrawn district. She'd
been endorsed
by Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Israel, two
Palestinian
gunmen killed at least three
people and wounded
five in Tel Aviv. Police said
the attackers
were detained. The location was
a popular
open-air market. It is the
latest in eight
months of Palestinian attacks,
most of them
involving stabbings.
GWEN IFILL: For the first time,
Italy has
custody of an alleged kingpin in
the smuggling
of thousands of migrants from
Libya. The suspect
from Eritrea was arrested in
Sudan two weeks
ago. He was flown to Rome
overnight. Officials
say intercepted calls show him
talking about
cramming more people on rickety
boats.
JUDY WOODRUFF: India's leader
went before
Congress today to declare
solidarity with
the United States.
William Brangham has our report.
MAN: The prime minister of the
republic of
India.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It was a
rousing welcome
today for Prime Minister
Narendra Modi.
NARENDRA MODI, Indian Prime
Minister: The
constraints of the past are
behind us, and
foundations of the future are
firmly in place.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Of course,
things were not
always so friendly. For decades,
the U.S.
and India were divided by
mistrust and Cold
War politics.
And Modi himself was refused
entry to the
U.S. in 2005, after religious
riots killed
more than 1,000 Muslims in the
state he governed.
But since becoming prime
minister in 2014,
he's worked to foster new
cooperation with
Washington.
Sumit Ganguly is a professor of
political
science at Indiana University in
Bloomington.
SUMIT GANGULY, Indiana
University: Unlike
a host of other Indian prime
ministers who
had cut their political teeth
during the Cold
War, and thereby harbored all
manner of misgivings
about the United States, Modi
doesn't carry
the same sort of political
baggage.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The two
countries share
growing concerns about China's
assertiveness
in the Asia-Pacific. Climate
change could
be another area of agreement.
Modi suggested
yesterday that India, the third
largest emitter
of carbon, could join last
year's Paris climate
pact by the end of this year.
NARENDRA MODI: To take from
nature only what
is most essential is a part of
our Indian
culture.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Still, serious
differences
remain. Human rights groups say
Modi has failed
to stop indentured servitude and
sex trafficking,
as well as protect India's
minorities.
SUMIT GANGULY: This is where I
think he as
fallen short and he does really
need to wake
up.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But such
concerns have clearly
been pushed to the background,
as Washington
and New Delhi move closer
together than ever.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
GWEN IFILL: There has been
another incident
between the U.S. and China in
the East China
Sea. The U.S. military says a
Chinese fighter
jet flew too close and too fast
to an American
reconnaissance plane yesterday.
But Beijing
said the U.S. is to blame.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And on Wall
Street, the Dow
Jones industrial average gained
66 points
to close at 18500. The Nasdaq
rose nearly
13, and the S&P 500 added seven.
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour":
an interview with Hillary
Clinton, the presumptive
Democratic presidential nominee;
what to expect
as candidates move full-speed
ahead into the
general election; child labor
rebuilding an
earthquake-struck Nepal; and
much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
interview with someone
who made history this week,
becoming the first
woman nominee for president of a
major political
party.
I spoke with Hillary Clinton a
short time
ago.
Secretary Clinton, thanks for
joining us.
And congratulations.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Thank you so much, Judy. It was
an extraordinary
time last night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, while you are
celebrating,
Senator Sanders is saying he's
out there,
going to fight, continue to
fight for every
vote, every delegate.
We know your staffs are talking,
but do you
have plans to personally talk to
him? And
what are the remaining hurdles
to come to
an agreement on rules and
platform at the
Democratic Convention?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well, I
called Senator
Sanders last evening and
congratulated him
on the hard-fought, determined
campaign that
he ran.
And I am looking forward to
working with him
to unify the Democratic Party
against the
threat that Donald Trump poses
to our country.
So, we are talking. We will be
having an opportunity
to discuss in greater detail in
the days ahead
how we can best work together.
I know he's seeing the president
tomorrow
at the White House. So, everyone
is focused
on bring the party together
behind our goal
of being sure that a Democrat
succeeds Barack
Obama next January.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you clearly
won many
more votes than Senator Sanders
did, but he
appears to have generated more
enthusiasm,
especially among younger voters.
How do you go about winning them
over, winning
their trust and getting them to
vote for you
in November?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well,
Judy, first
of all, let me say I think my
supporters are
pretty enthusiastic, too, and
they have turned
out for me by the millions, many
more millions
than Bernie Sanders and Donald
Trump.
And I want the stand up for my
supporters.
You know, they may not be the
most vocal and
demonstrating, but they show up
and vote.
And we have a broad-based,
inclusive foundation
for this campaign that we're
going to build
on going into the general
election.
But of course I recognize that
Senator Sanders
really connected with young
people in our
country. A lot of his energy
came from their
support for him, and we are
going to be reaching
out. We're going to be working
to make sure
that every young person who
supported Senator
Sanders, if that young person
cares about
income inequality or making
college affordable
or making sure everybody has
health care,
those are goals we share.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me ask
you about
Donald Trump, because it's
typical in American
-- modern American politics,
voters want a
change in direction, usually
after one president
for this long. Doesn't he
represent that?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Oh, I
think he represents
a great threat to our society
and our economy.
Now, there may be some people
who respond
to his sloganeering and his
bigotry and bullying,
but I just don't think that a
majority of
Americans are going to buy it.
And we saw
just this past week his racist
attack on the
federal judge, accusing him of
being unable
to be impartial in hearing the
case that is
exposing the fraud at Trump
University.
And it is just heartbreaking, as
well as outrageous.
So, I think he has a lot of
challenges in
overcoming the words and deeds
that he has
already used in this campaign
and before that
I think make him unqualified to
be president,
temperamentally unfit to be
commander in chief.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Donald
Trump is saying,
as I think you know, that he's
going to make
a major speech early next week.
He says he's
going to detail how you, as
secretary of state,
that there were conflicts of
interests while
the Clinton Foundation was doing
business
with foreign countries while you
were in office,
that the foundation benefited
personally from
this.
He's going to talk about, he
said, millions
of dollars being exchanged. Is
this something
you're worried about? And is the
foundation
something you need to sever you
and your family
from completely if you're
elected?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I am not
worried about
this.
I mean, this is just more of the
same recycled
attacks that people like Donald
Trump have
been making against us for a
long time. There's
no factual basis to it. That's
been proven
time and time again. I can't
stop someone
from retreading arguments that
have been disproved
over and over again.
He can say whatever he wants to.
He can run
whatever campaign he wants to.
So I'm not
going to respond to his personal
attacks.
That's something that, you know,
he can choose
to do. I'm going to respond,
however, to the
attacks that he makes on women
and immigrants
and Muslims and people with
disabilities and
POWs and federal judges, and the
list keeps
growing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary
Clinton, one question
on foreign policy. You were
described in a
recent acclaimed book by Mark
Landler as being
the -- quote -- "house hawk" in
the Clinton
war cabinet.
And we know that you -- and you
talked about
this -- you encouraged the
president to intervene
in Libya in 2011. Recently,
President Obama
said his worst mistake in office
was probably
failing to plan for the day
after what he
thought was the right thing to
do in intervening
there.
How do you see your
responsibility in that?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well,
first of all,
it's important to remember where
we were and
why the president made the
decision he did,
because this was a presidential
decision.
I have advised the president.
Sometimes, he
follows my advice. Sometimes, he
doesn't.
Sometimes, he uses a combination
of what he
hears from his advisers. We were
looking at
a potential disaster, as Gadhafi
threatened
to massacre large numbers of his
population.
The Europeans, our Arab allies
were urging
us to help them to try to
prevent that. After
due diligence, we came up with a
way of supporting
their efforts that didn't cost a
single American
life. And we saved a lot of
Libyan lives.
Now, could we have done more
after the Gadhafi
regime was ended? Well, that's
always second-guessing.
And I'm sure that there's more
we could have
done, but let's look at what we
did do.
We, along with the U.N. and
others, helped
to superintend two free and fair
elections,
something that is still quite an
accomplishment
by the Libyan people. They chose
moderate
leaders.
Unfortunately, preexisting
rivalries within
the country has prevented the
government from
really being able to act on
behalf of the
nation. So, of course, if there
were more
things to be done that we could
have influenced,
I think that's something we
should be looking
at and evaluating, because Libya
still is
a country that is struggling to
be successful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally, a
quick running
mate question. How big a
negative do you think
it would be to choose a sitting
senator from
a state with a Republican
governor, knowing
that would mean a Republican
replacement?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well, I
know it's
a big concern to my friends in
the Senate,
and I respect that concern.
I'm going the choose someone who
I think would
be ready to be president at a
moment's notice.
Obviously, I will listen to my
former colleagues,
as they are working so hard to
take back the
Senate. But I'm going to really
be focused
on the qualifications that the
person brings
to the job.
And I haven't gotten into that
in the depth
I will, but that's what my
guiding star will
be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary
Clinton, we thank
you. And, again,
congratulations.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Thanks a
lot, Judy.
Great to talk to you.
GWEN IFILL: And now for some
context on this
historic moment.
We are joined by Rebecca
Traister, writer-at-large
for "New York" magazine and the
author of
"All The Single Ladies:
Unmarried Women and
the Rise of an Independent
Nation"," presidential
historian Ellen Fitzpatrick,
author of the
book "The Highest Glass Ceiling:
Women's Quest
for the American Presidency,"
and John Lawrence,
visiting professor at the
University of California
Washington Center and former
chief of staff
to House Minority Leader Nancy
Pelosi.
Ellen Fitzpatrick, this takes me
back to Margaret
Chase Smith in 1964, Shirley
Chisholm, in
1972, but neither of them got
this far. How
big a breakthrough, I guess,
what Hillary
Clinton accomplished last night?
ELLEN FITZPATRICK, Professor of
History, University
of New Hampshire: Huge, as our
current candidates
would say. It's absolutely an
extraordinary
achievement.
I think Hillary Clinton really
has been underestimated
as a politician. But when you
set her campaign
within the long arc of history,
you can see
what an extraordinary
achievement it is, 150
years almost since the first
woman attempted
to run for president, Victoria
Woodhull, in
the 1870s.
And now Hillary Clinton has
actually won the
nomination of a major -- or come
close to,
will soon win the nomination of
major political
party.
GWEN IFILL: Rebecca Traister,
you know, two,
four -- eight years ago, when
Barack Obama
bested her, there was a general
idea that
took hold that she just really
wasn't that
good a candidate, and that, even
though it
was close, she just couldn't
pull it off.
What's the difference between
2008 and 2016?
REBECCA TRAISTER, Author, "All
The Single
Ladies: Unmarried Women and the
Rise of an
Independent Nation": Well, I
think she was
running against a less
formidable opponent,
and that's not to take anything
away from
Bernie Sanders, who ran a
tremendous campaign.
And obviously he was a long-shot
candidate
by many measures, and he
generated an enormous
amount of excitement, was very
inspiring,
very inspiring to so many young
people, so
many people on the left, was
wonderful.
But when she was competing
against Barack
Obama, she was really competing
against one
of the most gifted politicians
of our lifetimes,
I think. And the idea that she
didn't perform
well in 2008, there were all
kinds of problems
with her campaign, and she
wasn't as good
a candidate in 2008, but she did
have a very
strong performance.
Remember that she earned 18
million votes
in 2008. I mean, both she and
Obama ran exceptional
campaigns, by some measures, in
terms of getting
people enthusiastic and involved
in the process.
In this case, I think the
campaign was stronger.
She's a more comfortable and a
more confident
candidate this time around. I
think that she
trusted herself a little bit
more. She still
has flaws. She's still not
wonderful on a
big stage.
But I think that she was much
more in control
of her campaign and her
candidacy this time,
and I think she just wasn't up
against a superstar
like Barack Obama, all respect
to Bernie Sanders.
GWEN IFILL: John Lawrence, you
worked for
Nancy Pelosi for some time. We
still remember
that moment when she became
speaker of the
House and the huge gavel was
handed over to
her.
How different was it when a
woman, in her
-- in this case, for speaker of
the House,
became such a breakthrough
candidate?
JOHN LAWRENCE, Former Chief of
Staff to Nancy
Pelosi: It was a very historic
moment.
And I think maybe you remember
that she asked
all the children who were in the
chamber to
come up and join her on the
podium, although
that was technically against the
rules, because
she wanted to symbolize the
importance of
a woman, and someone who was
primarily concerned
about the economics and the
needs of American
families, to be part of that
transition.
But Speaker Pelosi used to say,
now we have
made history. Now we have to
make progress.
And I think she was very adamant
about wanting
to define the importance of her
accession
speakership in terms of the
legislation and
the policy goals that she
sought, not simply
in terms of gender.
GWEN IFILL: And yet I heard a
lot of discussion
then, as now with Hillary
Clinton, about her
hair, about her clothes, about
the fact that
her husband shopped for her,
what designers
she wore, which you didn't
generally hear
about men.
JOHN LAWRENCE: No, I actually
worked for somebody
for 30 years before that, and if
I could get
him to comb his hair, I thought
that was a
major accomplishment.
(LAUGHTER)
JOHN LAWRENCE: I think that's
true. I think
it's true that women are still
subjected to
standard that most male
candidates and male
officeholders are not subjected
to.
We used to talk in the office
about the fact
that John Boehner would cry at
the drop of
a hat. Imagine if Nancy Pelosi
had cried when
she faced a difficult vote. So,
there's a
different standard.
But the women who get to this
stage in politics,
just like women who get to this
stage in other
very competitive areas of life,
they have
learned to live with the
challenges that are
thrown at them.
GWEN IFILL: Ellen Fitzpatrick,
you're on a
college campus. Perhaps you can
explain to
us part of the generational
divide that we
have seen. I don't know whether
we're talking
about strategy or ideology or
just fact.
What's the leap for young women
in -- why
are they so -- so many of them
so unimpressed
by this kind of breakthrough?
ELLEN FITZPATRICK: Well, I'm not
sure that
that's actually true, Gwen.
And I think we have to see how
things unfold
in the next few months. It is
the case, of
course, that Bernie Sanders
really excited
a lot of college students, and I
think they
were drawn to his message, his
idealism, the
scope of his progressive
platform, and less
so perhaps to Hillary Clinton,
or clearly
so.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Rebecca Traister,
you spent some
time with her on the campaign
trail prior
to the final primaries.
And I wonder, A, if that's true.
And I wonder
if, instead of not knowing her
well enough,
we feel that we know Hillary
Clinton too well?
REBECCA TRAISTER: Yes, all those
things are
true.
In part, I think that what Ellen
is talking
about is very true. There is
more enthusiasm
for her than is necessarily made
clear by
the media narratives around her.
I mean, after
all, look, she -- she won more
votes. I mean,
despite all the stories about
the enormous
enthusiasm for Bernie Sanders,
which clearly
existed amongst young people and
people of
all ages, Hillary Clinton got
three million
more votes than he did in the
end.
There is obviously enthusiasm
about her, but
there are some translation
issues around how
to express that enthusiasm. And
I think that
that's something that has to
change. One of
the things that I did notice on
the campaign
trail, as I mentioned, she's
very bad in these
big, inspiring -- well, not very
bad.
She can be bad in these big,
inspiring speech
contests -- context, the big
stages. But she's
really an exceptional retail
politician. And
when you're with her not just
one-on-one in
a kind of social or friendly
situation, but
watching her shake the hands of
voters, of
local politicians, address rooms
full of people
talking about their individual
stories, their
issues, she really lights up a
room and people
get thrilled about her.
And that doesn't often come
through in the
media coverage of her.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Well, of course,
Judy Woodruff
just interviewed Hillary
Clinton, so I will
let the viewers judge how well
she did with
the press.
But I want to ask John Lawrence
here about
the Donald Trump factor, which
is, with Donald
Trump as the foil, macho guy,
not hesitating
to challenge, to throw the
gauntlet down,
does that change what she has to
do as a breakthrough
woman candidate?
JOHN LAWRENCE: I think that
Trump in that
sense is a bit of a gift,
because he has such
a strong misogynist tone to so
much of what
he says, that he almost
insulates Mrs. Clinton
against some of what might
otherwise be questions
about being a woman or being the
first woman
candidate.
I think the other problem that
Mr. Trump will
find running against Secretary
Clinton is
that security is a very
high-priority issue,
and particularly a high-priority
issue with
women voters. To be running
against somebody
who was a secretary of state, a
United States
senator, sat in the Situation
Room, met with
dozens of foreign national
leaders, and then
play that off against a complete
lack of experience,
I think, really will cause a lot
of voters
who might otherwise be somewhat
ambivalent
to Mrs. Clinton say, in a world
that is as
uncertain and as dangerous as
this world,
we really -- we really feel more
comfortable
with somebody who has been
around the track,
as she has.
GWEN IFILL: I'm afraid we are
going to have
to come back to this topic again
and again
as the year unfolds to see if
what you just
said is true, for instance.
John Lawrence, thank you very
much. Rebecca
Traister and Ellen Fitzpatrick,
thank you
as well.
ELLEN FITZPATRICK: Thank you.
JOHN LAWRENCE: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more on
Donald Trump's
campaign for the White House,
I'm joined by
Susan Page, Washington bureau
chief for USA
Today, and Reid Wilson, chief
political correspondent
for the Morning Consult.
And welcome back to both of you.
So, let's pick up the
conversation, Reid,
about Donald Trump, all this
focus for days
after days now about what he
said about this
judge of Mexican heritage. How
much damage
has been done?
REID WILSON, Morning Consult:
Well, not only
has he done more damage to his
own campaign.
He's doing damage now to the
rest of the Republican
Party.
The Republican Party has spent
years trying
to rebuild relationships with
the Hispanic
community in particular. George
W. Bush got
44 percent of the Hispanic vote
when he won
reelection in 2004. Mitt Romney
got 27 percent
of the vote. It's the
fastest-growing minority
group in America. Republicans
need to make
those inroads.
Donald Trump is busy erasing all
of the inroads
that have been made. And it's
starting to
impact down-ballot Republicans
across the
country. The Des Moines Register
today takes
Senator Chuck Grassley to task
for not having
-gone - having repudiated Donald
Trump's comments,
saying that they had seen better
spines on
invertebrates.
So, this is starting to infect
the entire
party, and that's the real
danger in Donald
Trump's comments.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
this, Susan?
How long-lasting is this?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
Well, you know, we have been
talking about
divisions in the Democratic
Party and whether
Bernie Sanders will embrace
Hillary Clinton.
The divisions in the Democratic
Party are
nothing compared to the civil
war that is
brewing in the Republican Party.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Civil war?
SUSAN PAGE: The civil war.
We had the top-ranking
Republican of the United
States, the speaker of the
House, Paul Ryan,
say that the party's
presidential nominee
was making racist statements.
This is an extraordinary
situation, and not resolved.
We saw Donald Trump try to be
more restrained
last night, when he talked with
the benefit
of a teleprompter, kind of a
different message
than he's had before. But the
test will be,
over the time of this campaign,
over the next
six weeks, before the
convention, can he keep
that more moderate tone?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we heard --
Reid, we heard
Donald Trump -- or we read today
that he said
he was disappointed that these
Republican
leaders are being critical of
him.
How does something like this get
repaired?
REID WILSON: And he is
disappointed that his
comments have been misconstrued.
I find it
hard to imagine how the comments
were misconstrued.
He was pretty clear about what
he said.
I think that how this gets
repaired depends
on how professionally Donald
Trump's campaign
is going to be run. He ran this
primary campaign
on a sort of seat-of-his-pants
basis, these
big mega-rallies, without the
sorts of sort
of blocking and tackling that
are required
to run a professional, modern
presidential
campaign.
If Trump isn't going to build
that kind of
modern campaign, I don't think
these things
can be repaired.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Where do you see
this going,
Susan? Is this the kind of thing
that just
-- is just going to have legs as
long as the
-- there's oxygen to support it?
SUSAN PAGE: Well, as long as
Donald Trump
is at center stage. And he's
going to be at
center stage for the rest of
this year, until
Election Day. You know, he's
going to be the
face of the Republican Party.
Other Republicans are going to
have to either
embrace him or distance
themselves from him.
And every day they spend doing
that is a day
they don't attack Hillary
Clinton and the
Democratic Party. Every day that
goes on,
it makes it less likely that
Republicans will
be able to hold control of the
Senate, for
instance, even longer shot, get
control of
the House.
So, I think that Republicans --
some senior
Republicans are now looking at
this and trying
to figure out, how can we not
only be competitive
in a presidential race, but
avoid longer-lasting
damage down the ballot and in
years to come?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
Reid, we showed a clip of Donald
Trump last
night saying he was appealing to
Bernie Sanders
supporters in this election.
What do people
think is there? Is that really
something that
could happen?
REID WILSON: Every four years, I
feel like
we get to this point in the
election where
we talk about how deeply divided
one party
is and how one party's candidate
-- voters
might go and vote for the other
party's candidate
in protest.
It never really happens. Even
today, we have
got close to 90 percent of
Republican voters
saying they will vote for Donald
Trump, about
85 percent of Democratic voters
saying they
will vote for Hillary Clinton.
Once there
is a clear contrast between
Hillary Clinton
and Donald Trump, those partisan
voters will
largely come home.
I think the notion of appealing
-- Donald
Trump appealing to Bernie
Sanders voters is
fanciful at best.
SUSAN PAGE: You know, I actually
think there
is one way in which there could
be some overlap
there, where Donald Trump could
in fact appeal
to Bernie Sanders voters, in
that there are
some voters who are just so
eager for change,
so disgusted with the way the
system works
now, that they might have
supported Bernie
Sanders.
Now, they might be open to a
Trump appeal.
I mean, that's the tantalizing
thing for Republicans.
There are some strengths that
Donald Trump
could bring to a presidential
campaign, an
ability to appeal to some voters
that Republicans
haven't traditionally gotten.
The question
is, does he wash that away with
some of his
more provocative statements?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly,
finally, to both
of you, I asked Hillary Clinton
about the
Donald Trump threat really to
bring out new
information, damaging
information about the
Clinton Foundation.
Is that something she should be
worried about?
REID WILSON: I don't think so.
Hillary Clinton
has been in the public spotlight
for 25 years.
What is there new? Who is
undecided about
Hillary Clinton and whether or
not they have
favorable impression?
I think a lot of these attacks
are going to
be the same things that
Republicans have tried
for a very long time, and they
haven't worked.
SUSAN PAGE: It does reinforce,
though, her
biggest vulnerability. Do you
trust her? Is
she honest? And so, in that way,
it goes to
a weakness that she's going to
have to face
in the months to come.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan Page, Reid
Wilson, thank
you.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us. Coming
up on the
"NewsHour": scientists try to
protect astronauts
by setting fires in spacecraft.
But, first: a report about the
scourge of
child labor in the back-breaking
brick manufacturing
process in Nepal.
That's from special
correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro, and it's part of his
series, Agents
for Change, a collaboration with
The Christian
Science Monitor.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Heavy
lifting is a way
of life in this Himalayan
country, but workers
in Nepal's brick kilns are in a
league of
their own.
Here, work is an endless cycle
of loads that
weigh more than the laborers who
carry them,
of polluted, oppressive
conditions, grinding
coal to stoke kilns that must be
kept alive
at some 2,000 degrees Fahrenheit
round the
clock, of molding clay into raw
bricks that
feed the ovens.
TILOOK MOKTAN, Nepal (through
translator):
You don't use your brains to do
this work.
It's just physical labor, but we
have no choice.
We have debts to pay.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Tilook
Moktan and his
wife, Rina, say life is a
never-ending cycle
of debt for medical bills, for
just running
the household, they say, and to
put their
children in school.
TILOOK MOKTAN (through
translator): I want
to see that my children are
educated, that
they complete their higher
education. Work
is too tough in the brick
sector.
MICHAEL HOLTZ, Christian Science
Monitor:
They will get up at midnight,
before it gets
too hot, work until dawn, sleep
for a few
hours, get up, start molding
more bricks,
and do it again the next night.
ANN HERMES, Christian Science
Monitor: It's
physically demanding at all
aspects. And that's
why I think its startling to see
children.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: We partnered
with Christian
Science Monitor reporter Michael
Holtz and
photographer Ann Hermes, who
took these still
photographs, on a story we found
especially
relevant now in this
earthquake-ravage country
about an industry notorious for
trapping children
and families in poverty.
MICHAEL HOLTZ: I think we really
wanted to
get a sense of, now that
reconstruction is
finally getting under way in
Nepal, and demands
for bricks is going to go so
high, what -- how
that would affect the brick kiln
industry
itself, in terms of, would there
be increases
in child labor, increases in
bonded labor?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: There are
some 1,100 brick
kilns across Nepal, a number
that's grown
recently, anticipating
large-scale rebuilding
from the earthquake.
HOMRAJ ACHARYA, Better Brick
Nepal: So these
are the areas where they make
bricks.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: All told,
they employ
about 250,000 people, says
Homraj Acharya,
who is part of a two-year-old
initiative called
Better Brick Nepal, or BBN.
And how many children again did
you say are
working in kilns today in Nepal?
HOMRAJ ACHARYA: We can find
around 60,000.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Sixty
thousand?
HOMRAJ ACHARYA: Children, yes,
because, you
know, it's a family-based
industry.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: They live in
brick shacks,
surrounded by LEGO-like
fortresses, molded
bricks stacked up at the start
of an almost
preindustrial process.
For brick makers, there are no
set working
hours. The basic rule is, you
work until you're
too tired to continue, and
there's every incentive
to continue to the point of
exhaustion, because
workers are paid by the brick.
They get a
little less than one U.S. cent
for every one
of these that they produce.
HOMRAJ ACHARYA: Because it's
paid on a piece
basis, so if children are making
like hundred
bricks more, so that means you
might get a
hundred.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: So, they
help the productivity,
which helps their wages?
HOMRAJ ACHARYA: Yes, exactly.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Do the
children help mold
bricks, I asked the Moktan?
Seven-year-old
Ritesh, no, but 12-year-old
Ritika, yes.
TILOOK MOKTAN (through
translator): She works
a few hours a week. She helps
with the cooking.
And, sometimes, when their
mother needs to
do the cooking, she helps out
with the bricks.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It may seem
normal for
children to pitch in with
chores. But Acharya
says these desperately poor
families invariably
grow to depend excessively on
the children
to scrape together more income.
HOMRAJ ACHARYA: The system
creates that enabling
environment for children to be
used.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The Better
Brick program
wants to create a different
environment, using
incentives for kiln owners.
Those who sign on agree to pay
for preschool
facilities like this one to get
children into
a classroom and away from the
brick workplace
of their parents. And BBN works
with owners
and parents to ensure that older
children
attend school.
For owners, these steps could be
good business.
HOMRAJ ACHARYA: Giving them
incentive in terms
of access to loans, and there is
helping them
to improve their quality of
bricks, and then,
when there is a bidding process,
we are talking
to the government.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: So you would
want the
government to procure bricks,
when it buys
bricks, from operators who are
certified as
not employing children and
improving conditions?
HOMRAJ ACHARYA: Absolutely. Yes,
that is one
of the -- the major point of
this program.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: This is one
of 23 kilns
that have so far signed on to
the program.
Co-owner Shiva Regmi said he's
happy to improve
conditions for workers, and he
can certainly
use the technical help.
SHIVA REGMI, Kiln Owner (through
translator):
For every one brick that we
make, two are
broken.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Regmi is a
newcomer to
this business -- this kiln is
just a few months
old -- and he may be more
receptive to the
Better Brick program than
others.
At another facility, the owner
complained
to Acharya that his industry is
being unfairly
singled out by advocates.
MAN (through translator): We are
giving opportunities
to 400,000 people who work in
our industry,
and we don't ask their children
to work. People
are spreading rumors that we are
hiring children,
but that's not true.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Many owners
can technically
make that claim, Acharya says,
because their
contracts are with adults. It's
parents who
press their children into
service.
Then there's the murkier world
of subcontractors
who provide laborers, many of
them children
who are not with their families
brought here
under various arrangements by
labor agents
or traffickers. It was quite
common to see
young boys loading and herding
the steady
train of work animals that carry
raw bricks
to the kilns.
It was more difficult to talk to
them. In
a strange twist, children here,
like many
other places, are told not to
talk to strangers.
I did manage one fleeting
conversation with
this young man.
"I had to leave school because
my mom and
dad weren't earning," he said,
"so I went
to work."
"How did you get this job?" I
asked.
"A rich man from our village
brought me here,"
he said.
How many others accompanied him?
"Oh, there are many," he said.
"All these
guys are from my village."
"Do you get any time to play?" I
asked.
"I do not play," he said.
And no more time for a stranger.
His is just
one anonymous story of thousands
in an underground
labyrinth that preys on poverty
and illiteracy,
one Nepal's government admits it
has few resources
to police.
But Homraj Acharya sees a tiny
silver lining.
Reconstruction will soon get
into high gear
with a windfall of foreign aid.
And, here,
he sees leverage.
HOMRAJ ACHARYA: Four billion has
already been
pledged by different countries.
And we want
to make sure that all of those
countries who
are giving money to Nepalese
government do
-- we want them to use the
bricks that are
produced child-labor-free.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He says
Nepal's builders
association has agreed to buy
bricks from
kilns his program has certified
as free of
child labor, where they're
available.
And it seems more likely the
Moktan family's
bricks will be free of child
labor, especially
after our interview, when I
asked sixth-grader
Ritika what her favorite subject
was.
GIRL: English.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: When you
grow up, what
kind of work would you like to
do?
GIRL: I would like to be a
doctor.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Doctor. Why?
GIRL: Because I want to help the
poor people.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Two short,
hesitant sentences,
but to her parents, she'd moved
a mountain,
and she'd moved them to tears.
TILOOK MOKTAN (through
translator): I'm really
proud that she was able to speak
to you in
English.
WOMAN (through translator): They
are tears
of happiness.
TILOOK MOKTAN (through
translator): We will
work as hard as we possibly can
to see that
she completes her education.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: For the "PBS
NewsHour,"
this is Fred de Sam Lazaro in
Nepal's Kathmandu
Valley.
GWEN IFILL: Fred's report was
supported by
the Pulitzer Center on Crisis
Reporting and
it's a partnership with the
Under-Told Stories
Project at the University of St.
Thomas in
Minnesota.
You can find more on this story
from our partners
at The Christian Science Monitor
on our Web
site.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: how NASA is
trying to
fight fire with fire in space.
Researchers are conducting new
experiments
that would limit that particular
danger for
future space travel.
Science correspondent Miles
O'Brien has the
story. It's part of our weekly
series on the
Leading Edge of science and
technology.
JOHN GRUNSFELD, NASA: We are
crossing an international
boundary. We are on the U.S.
side now, and
now we are on the Russian Mir
space station.
MILES O'BRIEN: By 1997, the
Russian space
station Mir was 11 years old and
showing its
age. During the fifth shuttle
mission to the
station, astronaut John
Grunsfeld documented
the warren of modules brimming
with a disorienting
maze of cables, hoses and trash.
JOHN GRUNSFELD: I feel like I am
exploring
a cave.
MILES O'BRIEN: Can you imagine
being in a
fire here?
U.S. astronaut Jerry Linenger
lived that nightmare
on February 23, 1997.
JERRY LINENGER, NASA: The fire
was basically
in this region here with the
flames shooting
across this way.
MILES O'BRIEN: The source was a
canister filled
with chemicals designed to
generate oxygen.
JERRY LINENGER: You have got a
two- or three-foot
flame, blowtorch-like in
intensity, sparks
flying off the end of it. It
looks like a
hundred sparklers all at once.
MILES O'BRIEN: Linenger and his
Russian crewmates
donned masks and frantically
fought the fire.
JERRY LINENGER: The fire took
about 14 minutes
total, and 14 minutes is a long
time with
a roaring fire and a blackout
from the smoke,
and no place to go. And if it
were any bigger,
I'm pretty darn sure we would
have lost that
spacecraft.
MILES O'BRIEN: For NASA
scientists and engineers,
it was a big wakeup call.
GARY RUFF, NASA Glenn Research
Center: One
of the things that you learn is,
we really
didn't have a way to put that
fire out.
MILES O'BRIEN: Gary Ruff is a
scientist at
NASA's Glenn Research Center in
Cleveland,
Ohio. This is where the agency
does most of
its research on fires in the
weightless environment
of space called microgravity.
GARY RUFF: They used water foam
fire extinguishers
that they had, but that probably
at most just
kind of cooled everything else
around it and
kept it from spreading.
MILES O'BRIEN: Ruff leads a team
that is trying
to learn more about big fires in
space. So,
the plan is to deliberately set
one and watch
what happens, really.
All right, so what are we
looking at here,
David?
DAVID URBAN, NASA: This is the
Saffire-III
module.
MILES O'BRIEN: David Urban is
the principal
investigator for the Spacecraft
Fire Experiment,
or Saffire.
We spoke beside Saffire-III,
slated for launch
at the end of 2016. The one
currently in space,
Saffire-I, is an identical box
strapped inside
a cargo ship. Once the craft
makes its delivery,
departs and is a safe distance
from the International
Space Station, it will be time
to light the
fire inside Saffire.
Fire on a spacecraft is a pretty
scary thing,
isn't it?
DAVID URBAN: It's a very small
space. What
you would normally tolerate in
your house
are completely non-tolerable in
a spacecraft.
MILES O'BRIEN: NASA's most
painful fire lesson
came in 1967, when three
astronauts were killed
during a countdown test on the
launchpad in
Florida. It prompted a lot of
changes in spacecraft
designs. The agency took great
pains to eliminate
flammable materials wherever
possible.
But fires in microgravity are
harder to predict.
A lot of unanswered questions
about fires
in microgravity, right?
DAVID URBAN: A huge number.
Basically, we
don't really know how fast they
will grow
or how large they will get, nor
do we really
understand, given the way the
spacecraft are
built, how quickly that
temperature and pressure
rise will be a problem for the
crew.
MILES O'BRIEN: On the ground,
when you light
a candle, the heat of the flame
melts the
wax. It pulls up into the wick.
It vaporizes,
and that is what fuels the
flame.
So if gravity is pushing
everything downward,
what is it that makes a flame go
upwards?
Well, as it turns out, the flame
is surrounded
by higher-pressure air. And
gravity is pulling
down colder, denser air, meaning
there is
more pressure at the base of the
flame. That's
what causes the flame to go up.
It's buoyancy.
It's the same thing that keeps a
boat afloat.
In space, when the gravity meter
reads zero,
the cool, dense air no longer
flows downward.
Instead, the air puts equal
pressure on the
flame from all directions. The
end result?
Candle flames in space are
spherical. Over
the years, NASA has conducted
several combustion
experiments on small samples of
paper, cloth,
plastics and hydrocarbons in
special chambers
on Skylab, the space shuttle and
station.
DAVID URBAN: But they have all
been really
small. And so one of the open
questions that
we have got is how large that
flame can get.
MILES O'BRIEN: During the
Saffire-I test,
they will set fire to a piece of
cloth just
like this. It's 75 percent
cotton, the rest
fiberglass to give it strength.
They will analyze the fire with
sensors that
measure temperature, airflow,
velocity, carbon
dioxide, and oxygen. But their
main instrument
will be two cameras and some
controlled lighting.
The images in the data will be
beamed back
to Earth. When the experiment is
done, the
cargo ship will be will be
guided to its own
fiery end over the South
Pacific.
The Saffire team is planning
three more experiments,
for a total of six. The fires
will grow larger,
eventually simulating a
full-fledged spacecraft
fire scenario.
GARY RUFF: Since we're going to
release the
gases into the cabin, we want to
have some
material there that the crew
would have to
help clean up after a fire.
MILES O'BRIEN: Jerry Linenger
would certainly
not disagree with that.
JERRY LINENGER: Packing up. Time
to head home.
MILES O'BRIEN: Linenger made it
home safe
and sound after all, but by the
skin of his
teeth.
JERRY LINENGER: People say how
brave you were.
I don't know. Bravery, you have
got to have
an option. You have got to have
an option
to run.
MILES O'BRIEN: As NASA sets its
sights on
long-duration human missions to
Mars, it really
isn't a question of if there
will be a fire,
just when and how will the crew
be equipped
to respond?
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Cleveland.
GWEN IFILL: We will be back in a
moment.
But, first, take the time to
hear from your
local PBS station. It's a chance
to offer
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: On
the "NewsHour" online right now:
the fluctuating
U.S. dollar and its impact on
the "NewsHour" online right now:
the fluctuating
U.S. dollar and its impact on
the global economy. But how does
it affect
American consumers? We take a
closer look
the global economy. But how does
it affect
American consumers? We take a
closer look
in our Making Sense column
online.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday, we will talk to the
U.S. secretary
of homeland security, Jeh
Johnson. I'm Judy
On Thursday, we will talk to the
U.S. secretary
of homeland security, Jeh
Johnson. I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And
I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.